+++
title = '2025 Week 1'
date = 2025-01-09T19:40:33-05:00
draft = false
+++


in this degree, i am learning a lot and i want to understand these things in a personal way and not breeze through with the delusion of understanding. i want to connect to the materials and make them mine.

more specifically, at the moment i am starting from scratch for comp. chem. and ml theory because i want to get it. i love the high of just "knowing" something, truly knowing it. 

i would like to get to a place of being able to confidently figure my way through the bushes of these complex and elegant fields, and to do this with the lamguage and ideas i feel connected to. 

hence this first post. 

for comp. chem, i am currently walking through david sherrill's [intro to comp. chem. youtube playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFYoDkTAQWKBarFNED2smakjXwK5hkUrP), and for ml i started with andriy burkov's [100 page ml book](https://themlbook.com/wiki/doku.php).



### notes:

1. last week, i took a hpc course from uc boulder and took some notes. i am going to make a post about it.
2. i learned qchem prints S0 -> SX transition energies at SX optimized geometry, so this is technically not adiabatic excitation energy. at the back of my mind, i am going "why would they do that instead of SX energy at SX optimized geometry - S0 energy at S0 optimized geometry?", which is indeed what i typically need when doing calculations. apparently, S2 energy at S2 energy - S0 energy at S2 minimum is called the vertical emission energy, while, the adiabatic excitation energy (AEE) is instead the S2 energy at the S2 minimum - S0 energy at the S0 geometry and i didn't know the difference.
3. i learned a trick to color the files and folders differently in the terminal - `ls --color`. added this as an ls alias in my `.bashrc` and i like the view.  